Scaling Justice: Building Legal Products

Productization of legal services as an unrealized opportunity at the intersection of innovation, technology, & entrepreneurship. Yet, no law school offers a course, clinic or program teaching students how to do it. No law review articles exists on the topic. No one has tested what sort of teams do, and do not, build good products.
This is surprising, given the potential of the method to change the opportunities for providing services to those in need. Given the recent rush of funding to legaltech startups ($720m in combined funding for legaltech companies in the past few years; more than 400 legaltech startups founded in 2016 alone), it also defies logic that no one has studied it.  
The opportunity is great.  Referring, generally, to productization of professional services, Harvard Business Review describes its benefits as follows:
By leveraging the power of algorithm-driven automation and data analytics to “productize” aspects of their work, a number of innovative firms are finding that, like Google and Adobe, they can increase margins as they grow, while giving clients better service at prices that competitors can’t match. Productivity rises, efficiencies increase, and nonlinear scale becomes feasible as productized services take over high-volume tasks and aid judgment-driven processes. That frees up well-paid professionals to focus on jobs that require more sophistication—and generate greater value for the company.

Put differently, when applied to law, productization can help solve many of the problems that ail both the legal aid lawyers attempting to close the access to justice gap, and the community of law firm/law department lawyers seeking to remain profitable. It can offer better service to clients, reduce reliance on the billable hour for revenue, and create new revenue streams. 
A few companies have already created legal products (e.g. LegalZoom), however, the players in this space almost always come from outside of the practice of law.  Few, if any, projects have been created by those with the most direct knowledge of needs: those working in the legal profession, encountering live clients and actual courts regularly.  
To change this culture, I envision building teams of legal professionals with skill-sets capable of building their own prototypes sufficient to seek funding. I theorize the skills that should be assembled on a legal products team are:

Design Thinking
Determining what products to build requires an understanding of users’ needs and desires. Design thinking provides a template for discovering those needs, creating prototypes to test assumptions, and iterating based on feedback.
Process Improvement 
Knowing what potential clients want to buy is only a portion of the task; the actual tool developed for the clients should be designed to maximize efficiency of development (and user by the end-user), while minimizing errors. This is precisely the role of process improvement. 
Substantive Legal Knowledge
To build a tool for a legal audience, the creator has to deeply understand that area of law.
Business Acumen	
Building a product users want is valuable, but so too is knowing how to sell it to them.  Having business acumen to understand advertising, marketing, and branding of SaaS would be valuable.
Technical Skills
Because of the nature of productization in automating work, having an understanding of the technologies of automation is vital. It’s likely not necessary for a lawyer building a product to be a “coder” (and some projects might not even require any programming), but knowing enough to create prototypes sufficient for a minimum viable product (or, at the least, knowing enough to recognize the possible) is important.
‘
[poster vision: Venn diagram w/ 5 interlocking circles w/ 5 skills; stats about legal needs in A2J space; reference to FutureLaw class, which is an example of an approach using the above methods to resolve this problem]
---

[1]Productization is the process of adapting a legal service traditionally done repetitively for individual clients into an “information product” that can be licensed or sold to a much larger audience than the traditional client-base. A consumer-facing example is LegalZoom.  Tasks completed within a firm or legal organization could also be productized for a B2B market (e.g. a firm that creates an internal resource to apprise attorneys of updates in regulatory law could productize that work into a subscription newsletter available to other law firms). 

[2]Mohanbir Sawhney, Putting Products into Services, Harv. Bus. Rev. Sept. 2016 (available online at: https://hbr.org/2016/09/putting-products-into-services). 

